CHAPTER III The Struggle for an Education
One day, while at work in the coal mine, I happened to overhear two miners talking about
a great school for colored people somewhere in Virginia.
This was the first time that I had ever heard anything about any kind of school or college
that was more pretentious than the little colored school in our town.
In the darkness of the mine, I noiselessly crept as close as I could to the two men who
were talking.
I heard one tell the other that not only was the school established for the members of
any race, but the opportunities that it provided by which poor but worthy students could work
out all or a part of the cost of a board and at the same time be taught some trade or industry.
As they went on describing the school, it seemed to me that it must be the greatest
place on earth, and not even heaven presented more attractions for me at that time than
I had the Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute in Virginia about which these men
were talking.
I resolved at once to go to that school, although I had no idea where it was or how many miles
away or how I was going to reach it.
I remembered only that I was on fire constantly with one ambition, and that was to go to Hampton.
This thought was with me day and night.
After hearing of the Hampton Institute, I continued to work for a few months longer
in the coal mine.
While at work there, I heard of a vacant position in the household of General Lewis Ruffner,
the owner of the salt furnace and coal mine.
Mrs. Viola Ruffner, the wife of General Ruffner, was a Yankee woman from Vermont.
Mrs. Ruffner had a reputation all through the vicinity for being very strict with her
servants, and especially with the boys who tried to serve her.
Few of them remained with her for more than two or three weeks.
They all left with the same excuse, she was too strict.
I decided, however, that I would rather try Mrs. Ruffner's house than remain in the coal
mine, and so my mother applied to her for the vacant position.
I was hired at a salary of five dollars per month.
I had heard so much about Mrs. Ruffner's severity that I was almost afraid to see her and trembled
when I went into her presence.
I had not lived with her many weeks, however, before I began to understand her.
I soon began to learn that, first of all, she wanted everything kept clean about her,
that she wanted things done promptly and systematically, and at the bottom of everything she wanted
absolute honesty and frankness.
Nothing must be sullivan or slipshod.
Every door, every fence must be kept in repair.
I cannot now recall how long I lived with Mrs. Ruffner before going to Hampton, but
I think it must have been a year and a half.
At any rate, I here repeat what I have said more than once before, that the lessons that
in the home of Mrs. Ruffner were as valuable to me as any education I have ever gotten
anywhere else.
Even to this day, I never see bits of paper scattered around the house or in the street
that I do not want to pick them up at once.
I never see a filthy yard that I do not want to clean it, a paling off a fence that I do
not want to put it on, an unpainted or un-whitewashed house that I do not want to paint or whitewash
it, or a button off one's clothes or a grease spot on them or on a floor that I do not want
to call attention to it.
From fearing Mrs. Ruffner, I soon learned to look upon her as one of my best friends.
When she found that she could trust me, she did so implicitly.
During the one or two winters that I was with her, she gave me an opportunity to go to school
for an hour in the day during a portion of the winter months, but most of my studying
was done at night, sometimes alone, sometimes under someone whom I could hire to teach me.
Mrs. Ruffner always encouraged and sympathized with me in all my efforts to get an education.
It was while living with her that I began to get together my first library.
I secured a dry goods box, knocked out one side of it, put some shelves in it, and began
putting into it every kind of book that I could get my hands upon and called it my library.
Notwithstanding my success at Mrs. Ruffner's, I did not give up the idea of going to the
Hampton Institute.
In the fall of 1872 I determined to make an effort to get there, although, as I have stated,
I had no definite idea of the direction in which Hampton was or of what it would cost
to go there.
I do not think that anyone thoroughly sympathized with me and my ambition to go to Hampton,
unless it was my mother, and she was troubled with a grave fear that I was starting out
on a wild goose chase.
At any rate, I only got a half-hearted consent from her that I might start.
The small amount of money that I had earned had been consumed by my stepfather and the
remainder of the family, with the exception of a very few dollars, and so I had very little
with which to buy clothes and pay my traveling expenses.
My brother John helped me all that he could, but of course that was not a great deal, for
his work was in a coal mine where he did not earn much, and most of what he did earn went
in the directions of paying the household expenses.
Perhaps the thing that touched and pleased me the most in connection with my starting
for Hampton was the interest that many of the older colored people took in the matter.
They had spent the best days of their lives in slavery and hardly expected to live to
the time when they would see a member of their race leave home to attend a boarding school.
Some of these older people would give me a nickel, others a quarter or a handkerchief.
Finally the great day came and I started for Hampton.
I had only a small cheap satchel that contained a few articles of clothing I could get.
My mother at the time was rather weak and broken in health.
I hardly expected to see her again and thus our parting was all the more sad.
She however was very brave through it all.
At that time there were no trains connecting that part of West Virginia with Eastern Virginia.
Trains ran only a portion of the way and the remainder of the distance was traveled by
stagecoaches.
The distance from Malden to Hampton is about 500 miles.
I had not been away from home many hours before it began to grow painfully evident that I
did not have enough money to pay my fare to Hampton.
One experience I shall long remember.
I had been traveling over the mountains most of the afternoon in an old-fashioned stagecoach
when, late in the evening, the coach stopped for the night at a common unpainted house
called a hotel.
All the other passengers except myself were whites.
In my ignorance, I suppose that the little hotel existed for the purpose of accommodating
the passengers who traveled on the stagecoach.
The difference that the color of one's skin would make I had not thought anything about.
After all the other passengers had been shown rooms and were getting ready for supper, I
shyly presented myself before the man at the desk.
It is true I had practically no money in my pocket with which to pay for bed or food,
but I had hoped in some way to beg my way into the good graces of the landlord, for
at that season in the mountains of Virginia the weather was cold and I wanted to get indoors
for the night.
Without asking as to whether I had any money, the man at the desk firmly refused to even
consider the manner of providing me with food or lodging.
This was my first experience in finding out what the color of my skin meant.
In some way I managed to keep warm by walking about and so got through the night.
My whole soul was so bent upon reaching Hampton that I did not have time to cherish any bitterness
towards the hotel keeper.
By walking, begging rides both in wagons and in the cars, in some way after a number of
days, I reached the city of Richmond, Virginia, about 82 miles from Hampton.
When I reached there, tired, hungry, and dirty, it was late in the night.
I had never been in a large city, and this rather added to my misery.
When I reached Richmond I was completely out of money.
I had not a single acquaintance in the place, and being unused to city ways I did not know
where to go.
I applied at several places for lodging, but they all wanted money, and that was what I
did not have.
Knowing nothing else better to do, I walked the streets.
In doing this I passed by many food stands where fried chicken and half-moon apple pies
were piled high and made to present a most tempting appearance.
At that time it seemed to me that I would have promised all that I expected to possess
in the future, to have gotten hold of one of those chicken legs or one of those pies.
But I could get neither of these nor anything else to eat.
I must have walked the streets till after midnight.
At last I became so exhausted that I could walk no longer.
I was tired, I was hungry, I was everything but discouraged.
Just about the time when I reached extreme physical exhaustion, I came upon a portion
of a street where the bored sidewalk was considerably elevated.
I waited for a few minutes till I was sure that no passers-by could see me, and then
crept under the sidewalk and lay for the night upon the ground with my satchel of clothing
for a pillow.
Nearly all night I could hear the tramp of feet over my head.
The next morning I found myself somewhat refreshed, but I was extremely hungry because it had
been a long time since I had had sufficient food.
As soon as it became light enough for me to see my surroundings, I noticed that I was
near a large ship and that this ship seemed to be unloading a cargo of pig iron.
I went at once to the vessel and asked the captain to permit me to help unload the vessel
in order to get money for food.
The captain, a white man who seemed to be kind-hearted, consented.
I worked long enough to earn money for my breakfast, and it seems to me, as I remember
it now, to have been about the best breakfast I have ever eaten.
My work pleased the captain so well that he told me if I desired I could continue working
for a small amount per day.
This I was very glad to do.
I continued working on this vessel for a number of days.
After buying food with the small wages I received, there was not much left to add on the amount
I must get to pay my way to Hampton.
In order to economize in every way possible, so as to be sure to reach Hampton in a reasonable
time, I continued to sleep under the same sidewalk that gave me shelter the first night
I was in Richmond.
Many years after that, the colored citizens of Richmond very kindly tendered me a reception
at which there must have been two thousand people present.
This reception was held not far from the spot where I slept the first night I spent in the
city, and I must confess that my mind was more upon the sidewalk that first gave me
shelter than upon the recognition, agreeable and cordial as it was.
When I had saved what I considered enough money with which to reach Hampton, I thanked
the captain of the vessel for his kindness and started again.
Without any unusual occurrence, I reached Hampton with a surplus of exactly fifty cents
with which to begin my education.
To me it had been a long, eventful journey, but the first sight of the large three-story
brick school building seemed to have rewarded me for all that I had undergone in order to
reach the place.
If the people who gave the money to provide that building could appreciate the influence
the sight of it had upon me, as well as upon thousands of other years, they would feel
all the more encouraged to make such gifts.
It seemed to me to be the largest and most beautiful building I had ever seen.
The sight of it seemed to give me new life.
I felt that a new kind of existence had now begun, that life would now have a new meaning.
I felt that I had reached the promised land, and I resolved to let no obstacle prevent
me from putting forth the highest effort to fit myself to accomplish the most good in
the world.
As soon as possible after reaching the grounds of the Hampton Institute, I presented myself
before the head teacher for an assignment to a class.
Having been so long without proper food, a bath, and a change of clothing, I did not,
of course, make a very favorable impression upon her, and I could see at once that there
were doubts in her mind about the wisdom of admitting me as a student.
I felt that I could hardly blame her if she got the idea that I was a worthless loafer
or tramp.
For some time she did not refuse to admit me, nor did she decide in my favor, and I
continued to linger about her and to impress her with all the ways I could with my worthiness.
In the meantime I saw her admitting other students, and that added greatly to my discomfort,
for I felt deep down in my heart that I could do as well as they if I could only get a chance
to show what was in me.
After some hours had passed the head teacher said to me,
The adjoining recitation room needs sweeping.
Take the broom and sweep it.
It occurred to me at once that here was my chance.
Never did I receive an order with more delight.
I knew that I could sweep, for Mrs. Ruffner had thoroughly taught me how to do that when
I lived with her.
I swept the recitation room three times.
Then I got a dusting cloth and dusted it four times.
All the woodwork around the walls, every bench, table, and desk I went over four times with
my dusting cloth.
Besides, every piece of furniture had been moved, and every closet and corner in the
room had been thoroughly cleaned.
I had the feeling that in the large measure my future depended upon the impression I made
upon the teacher in the cleaning of that room.
When I was through I reported to the head teacher.
She was a Yankee woman who knew just where to look for dirt.
She went into the room and inspected the floor and closets, then she took her handkerchief
and rubbed it on the woodwork, about the walls, and over the table and benches.
When she was unable to find one bit of dirt on the floor or a particle of dust on any
of the furniture, she quietly remarked, I guess you will do to enter this institution.
I was one of the happiest souls on earth.
The sweeping of that room was my college examination, and never did any youth pass an examination
for entrance into Harvard or Yale that gave him more genuine satisfaction.
I have passed several examinations since then, but I have always felt that this was the best
one I ever passed.
I have spoken of my own experience in entering Hampton Institute.
Perhaps few, if any, had anything like the same experience that I had, but about the
same period there were hundreds who found their way to Hampton and other institutes
after experiencing something of the same difficulties that I went through.
The young men and women were determined to secure an education at any cost.
The sweeping of the recitation room in the manner that I did it seems to have paved the
way for me to get through Hampton.
Miss Mary F. Mackey, the headteacher, offered me a position as janitor.
This of course I gladly accepted, because it was a place where I could work out nearly
all the cost of my board.
The work was hard and tasking, but I stuck to it.
I had a large number of rooms to care for, and had to work late into the night, while
at the same time I had to rise by four o'clock in the morning in order to build the fires
and have a little time in which to prepare my lessons.
In all my career at Hampton, and ever since I have been out in the world, Miss Mary F.
Mackey, the headteacher to whom I have referred, proved one of my strongest and most helpful
friends.
Her advice and encouragement were always helpful in strengthening me in the darkest hour.
I have spoken of the impression that was made upon me by the buildings and the general appearance
of the Hampton Institute, but I have not spoken of that which made the greatest and most lasting
impression on me, and that was a great man.
The noblest, rarest human being that it has ever been my privilege to meet.
I refer to the late General Samuel C. Armstrong.
It has been my fortunate to meet personally many of what are called great characters,
both in Europe and America, but I do not hesitate to say that I have never met any man who,
in my estimation, was the equal of General Armstrong.
Fresh from the degrading influences of the slave plantation and the coal mines, it was
a rare privilege for me to be permitted to come into direct contact with such a character
as General Armstrong.
I shall always remember that the first time I went into his presence, he made the impression
upon me of being a perfect man.
I was made to feel that there was something about him that was superhuman.
It was my privilege to know the general personally from the time I entered Hampton until he died,
and the more I saw of him, the greater he grew in my estimation.
One might have removed from Hampton all the buildings, classrooms, teachers, and industries,
and given the men and women there the opportunity of coming into daily contact with General
Armstrong, and that alone would have been a liberal education.
The older I grow, the more I am convinced that there is no education which one can get
from books and costly apparatus that is equal to that which can be gotten from contact with
great men and women.
Instead of studying books so constantly, how I wish our schools and colleges might learn
to study men and thens.
General Armstrong spent two of the last six months of his life in my home at Tuskegee.
At that time he was paralyzed to the extent that he had lost control of his body and voice
in a very large degree.
Notwithstanding his affliction, he worked almost constantly day and night for the cause
to which he had given his life.
I never saw a man who so completely lost sight of himself.
I do not believe that he ever had a selfish thought.
He was just as happy in trying to assist some other institute in the South as he was when
working for Hampton.
Although he fought the Southern white man in the Civil War, I never heard him utter
a bitter word against him afterward.
On the other hand, he was constantly seeking to find ways by which he could be of service
to the Southern whites.
It would be difficult to describe the hold that he had upon the students at Hampton or
the faith they had in him.
In fact, he was worshipped by his students.
It never occurred to me that General Armstrong could fail in anything that he undertook.
There was almost no request that he could have made that would not have been complied
with.
When he was a guest at my home in Alabama and was so badly paralyzed that he had to
be wheeled about in an invalids chair, I recall that one of the General's former students
had occasion to push his chair up a long steep hill that taxed his strength to the utmost.
When the top of the hill was reached, the former student, with a glow of happiness on
his face, exclaimed,
I am so glad that I have been permitted to do something that was real hard for the General
before he dies.
While I was a student at Hampton, the dormitories became so crowded that it was impossible to
room for all who wanted to be admitted.
In order to help remedy the difficulty, the General conceived the plan of putting up tents
to be used as rooms.
As soon as it became known that General Armstrong would be pleased if some of the older students
would live in the tents during the winter, nearly every student in school volunteered
to go.
I was one of the volunteers.
The winter that we spent in those tents was an intensely cold one, and we suffered severely.
How much I am sure General Armstrong never knew, because we made no complaints.
It was enough for us to know that we were pleasing General Armstrong, and that we were
making it possible for an additional number of students to secure an education.
More than once, during a cold night, when a stiff gale would be blowing, our tent was
lifted bodily, and we would find ourselves in the open air.
The General would usually pay a visit to the tents early in the morning, and his earnest,
cheerful, encouraging voice would dispel any feeling of despondency.
I have spoken of my admiration for General Armstrong, and yet he was but a type of that
Christ-like body of men and women who went into the Negro schools at the close of the
by the hundreds to assist in lifting up my race.
The history of the world fails to show a higher, purer, and more unselfish class of men and
women than those who found their way into those Negro schools.
Life at Hampton was a constant revelation to me, was constantly taking me into a new
world.
The matter of having meals at regular hours, of eating on the tablecloth, using the napkin,
the use of a bathtub and the toothbrush, as well as the use of sheets upon the bed were
all new to me.
I sometimes feel that almost the most valuable lesson I got at the Hampton Institute was
in the use and value of the bath.
I learned there for the first time some of its value, not only in keeping the body healthy,
but in inspiring self-respect and promoting virtue.
In all my travels in the South and elsewhere since leaving Hampton, I have always in some
way sought my daily bath.
To get it sometimes when I have been the guest of my own people in a single-roomed cabin
has not always been easy to do, except by slipping away to some stream in the woods.
I have always tried to teach my people that some provision for bathing should be the part
of every house.
For some time while a student at Hampton I possessed but a single pair of socks, but
when I had worn these till they became soiled I would wash them at night and hang them by
the fire to dry so that I might wear them again the next morning.
The charge for my board at Hampton was ten dollars per month.
I was expected to pay a part of this in cash and to work out the remainder.
To meet this cash payment, as I have stated, I had just fifty cents when I reached the
Institute.
Apart from the very few dollars that my brother John was able to send me once in a while,
I had no money with which to pay my board.
I was determined from the first to make my work as a janitor so valuable that my services
would be indispensable.
This I succeeded in doing to such an extent that I was soon informed that I would be allowed
the full cost of my board in return for my work.
The cost of tuition was seventy dollars a year.
This of course was wholly beyond my ability to provide.
If I had been compelled to pay the seventy dollars for tuition in addition to providing
for my board, I would have been compelled to leave the Hampton School.
General Armstrong, however, very kindly got Mr. S. Griffiths Morgan of New Bedford, Massachusetts,
to defray the cost of my tuition during the whole time I was at Hampton.
After I finished the course at Hampton and had interned upon my life work at Tuskegee,
I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Morgan several times.
After having been for a while at Hampton, I found myself in difficulty because I did
not have books and clothing.
Usually, however, I got around the trouble about books by borrowing from those who were
more fortunate than myself.
As to clothes, when I reached Hampton I had practically nothing.
Everything that I possessed was in a small hand satchel.
My anxiety about clothing was increased because of the fact that General Armstrong made a
personal inspection of the young man in ranks to see that their clothes were clean.
Shoes had to be polished, there must be no buttons off the clothing, and no grease spots.
To wear one suit of clothing continually while at work and in the classroom, and at the same
time keep it clean, was rather a hard problem for me to solve.
In some way I managed to get on until the teachers learned that I was in earnest and
meant to succeed, and then some of them were kind enough to see that I was partly supplied
with second-hand clothing that had been sent in barrels from the North.
These barrels proved a blessing to hundreds of poor but deserving students.
Without them I questioned whether I would have ever gotten through Hampton.
When I first went to Hampton I do not recall that I had ever slept in a bed that had two
sheets on it.
In those days there were not many buildings there, and room was very precious.
There were seven other boys in the same room with me, most of them however students who
had been there for some time.
The sheets were quite a puzzle to me.
The first night I slept under both of them, the second night I slept on top of them, but
by watching the other boys I learned my lesson in this and have been trying to follow it
ever since and to teach it to others.
I was among the youngest of the students who were in Hampton at the time.
Most of the students were men and women, some as old as forty years of age.
As I now recall the scene of my first year, I do not believe that one often has the opportunity
of coming into contact with three or four hundred men and women who were so tremendously
in earnest as these men and women were.
Every hour was occupied in study or work.
Nearly all of them had enough actual contact with the world to teach them the need of education.
Many of the older ones were, of course, too old to master the textbooks very thoroughly,
and it was often sad to watch their struggles, but they made up in earnest much of which
they lacked in books.
Many of them were as poor as I was, and besides having to wrestle with books, they had to
struggle with the poverty which had prevented them having the necessities of life.
Many of them had aged parents who were dependent upon them, and some of them were men who had
wives to support in some way they had to provide for.
The great and prevailing idea that seemed to take possession of everyone was to prepare
himself to lift up the people at his home.
No one seemed to think of himself, and the officers and teachers what a rare set of human
beings they were.
They worked for the students day and night, in seasons and out of season.
They seemed happy only when they were helping the student in some manner.
Whenever it is written, and I hope it will be, the part that the Yankee teachers played
in the education of the Negroes immediately after the war will make one of the most thrilling
parts of the history of this country.
The time is not far distant when the whole South will appreciate this service in a way
that it has not yet been able to.